# Silver

Silver is an attribute grammar-based language for the modular development of composable language extensions.

See [About Silver](#about-silver) below for more info.

See [The Silver Install Guide](http://melt.cs.umn.edu/silver/install-guide) for detailed information on how to get Silver set up.

## Prerequisites

Silver requires: Java 7+, Ant, Bash, and wget. It can run on Linux, MacOS, and Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) in Windows 10.

Silver is written in Silver, which means after checkout, you need initial jars. You can download these with a helpful script:

```
./update
```

This will `git pull` to update, download jars, and clear any files generated by older versions of Silver.
A one-stop-shop for updating after the initial clone.


# About Silver

Silver is an extensible attribute grammar system that support many
modern extensions to Knuth's original design.  These include
higher-order attributes, reference attributes, forwarding, aspects,
and collections attributes.  Its type system support parametric
polymorphism.  Silver is distributed with Copper, a parser and
context-aware scanner generator.

Please note that Silver is a research project and while we do endeavor
to create useful and quality software there may be bugs and missing
functionality.  Consult with us if you wish to use Silver for
"serious" work.  We otherwise make no guarantees about the features or
performance of Silver.

* Ted Kaminski  (tedinski@cs.umn.edu)
* Eric Van Wyk  (evw@cs.umn.edu)

Minnesota Extensible Language Tools (MELT) Group
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Minnesota
http://melt.cs.umn.edu


## The Silver web site

Downloads, documentation, and related papers are available on the
Silver web site: 

http://melt.cs.umn.edu/silver

Information about Copper and sample language frameworks developed with
Silver can be found on the MELT Group web site:

http://melt.cs.umn.edu


## Acknowledgements

Silver is currently developed and maintained by

* Ted Kaminski  (tedinski@cs.umn.edu)
* Eric Van Wyk  (evw@cs.umn.edu)

Past contributors include Derek Bodin, Lijesh Krishnan, and Jimin Gao.

We are very grateful to the National Science Foundation, the McKnight
Foundation, DARPA, the University of Minnesota, and IBM for funding
different aspects of our research and the development of Silver and
Copper. 


## Licensing

Silver and Copper are distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public
License.  See the files COPYING and COPYING.LESSER for details of
these licenses.  More information can be found at
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

